before Russia's invasion of Ukraine
there was relatively little public
awareness of how much the world relied
on Ukraine for the supply of grain or
how much Europe depended on Russia for
its energy Supply now as the devastating
conflict continues to unfold in the
Middle East some are beginning to wonder
what the bigger economic ramifications
might be especially when it comes to the
global supply of oil which could be
affected if Iran were to become more
embroiled in the conflict the region is
also a key shift route with disruption
to key waterways like the sez canal and
the straight of hermus potentially
causing delays in
deliveries and earlier I spoke to CM
jety Chief Economist at ING I asked him
what a possible escalation involving
Iran could mean for the global supply of
oil indeed I think this is where this
conflict will have bigger repercussions
for the rest of the world so just
looking at trade is is very naive um but
oil is an extremely important one we saw
already when when the uh the terroristic
attacks on Israel started that the oil
prices started to search um if Iran one
way or the other was to be involved in
this conflict Iran being an important
producer of oil if the entire Middle
East would somehow or one way or the
other be involved in this conflict with
as a result um maybe even sanctions
coming from the US on Iran on other
countries this would then clearly have a
big impact on on oil producing countries
therefore we would see oil prices going
up if this is this conflict was to
escalate we could really see oil prices
going above $100 per barrel very
easily yeah and this region is also a
key passageway for shipping what would a
disruption to those routes mean for the
global
economy indeed we see especially the the
street of homeless which is a very
important one not only for oil
Transportation but in general for for
transportation um this would then have
an impact again especially on oil prices
adding to the upward pressure on oil
prices and I think that is the bottom
line here so one is we we don't know
anything I think that's also what all
the other conflicts geopolitical
tensions over the last couple of years
have shown us it is impossible to really
tell anyone what the direct impact or
the explicit impant on growth will be
but what we do know is um that there
will be especially when the the entire
region would be involved in this
conflict there would be a big impact on
oil prices there would be an impact on
um at least transportation and that um
this idea that that oil prices could go
back to 70 or $80 per barrel uh would be
something of the past and that we then
would have to be prepared for another
oil price
crisis
How likely do you think such a scenario
is in all honesty I wouldn't dare
currently making predictions of How
likely such a scenario is I think what
what is important is that we know now
from whether whether the pandemic the
war in Ukraine that also these
unexpected events can have huge
repercussions can have a huge impact on
on the global economy I think it's Al
that we're now in this in this era of of
overlapping
emergencies um also makes that
uncertainty economic sentiment uh could
could weaken further and um so therefore
I would not come up with a prediction
How likely such a scenari is but the
last years have really clearly taught us
that it's always good to come up with
scenarios the base case scenario is one
in which the conflict will not further
escalate and we will not get the entire
region being involved in this conflict
but clearly um one of the the risk
scenarios is one with a further
escalation and also then as a
consequence much higher oil
prices you mentioned the geopolitical
ramifications because of course this
conflict isn't only affecting relations
between countries in the Middle East it
could also shape public opinion ahead of
next year's us elections what is your
take on the potential long-term
consequences I think one consequence is
something we're already witnessing in in
Europe um that this conflict could be
imported to Continental Europe maybe
also to the US why because we will see
that this conflict um could lead to some
terrorist attacks as we saw already in
Brussels as we saw in other European
countries so that there will be more
this conflict um coming to Europe coming
to the US what this means is clearly
more uncertainty um more uncertainty
which will wa way on on economic
sentiment but also uncertainty that
could make it easier for for for
populist parties for for populist
politicians to come up with with easy
answers so it's hard to tell what this
now really will mean for the
presidential election in the US um I
think what it will mean is we will have
even more polarized um debates not only
in the US but also in Europe and and I
hope that we will clearly see also more
support now for the Western World still
coming out of the US coming out of
Europe um because the risk clearly is
that um such a conflict that we're
currently seeing will have bigger
repercussions um if it is exported to
Europe and to the
US do you think governments should be
taking any specific measures to prepare
for potential economic
turmoil I think government governs have
been of course in this emergency
fighting mode already for a couple of
years right now it is very hard to
prepare what government should be
prepared to do this um that they should
not be hesitant to use fiscal stimulus
to use any kind of support measures to
cushion a potential downfall of of the
economy I think that is something that
every government should have learned
over the last couple of years be
prepared uh that there will be more yeah
more fluctuation we are living in a more
volatile environment so which will also
mean more at hoc more prompter um fiscal
policy action in order to to cushion the
impact from these geop potential
geopolitical events on the
economies all this volatility of course
leads to a whole lot of anxiety we've
recently seen a rise in the price of
gold as people seek safe places for
their money tell me about the role that
fear plays here
fear plays an enormous important fear
plays an enormously important role uh it
is that that that all people we all of
us you and me included so we're now
coming out of a period of of pandemic of
supply chain frictions of war in Ukraine
which is still going on now we have
another conflict in the Middle East with
potentially um an impact and and
repercussions on on the rest of the
world so this is clearly now you know
adding to all the fears that that that
people are having and uh and it is more
as a human reaction to try to find some
kind of Safe Haven I even forgot to add
the entire discussion about climate
change that we're having so this is um
really an enormous uncertain environment
for all people for all governments for
all policy makers and it's a normal
reaction then to you know go into safe
havens like gold like um government
bonds we also know and I think that is
the the horrible thing about financial
markets that financial markets love to
then move on and and forgot forget about
the the ongoing conflicts um which could
mean that in a couple of weeks in a
couple of months from now we will see
again more risk-taking behavior um but
um in in in general I think we will have
to accept that we're living in a more
volatile not only political but also
economic
environment kasm sheski Chief Economist
at in thank you very
much you're
welcome